blog for KEP-2033: Kubelet-in-UserNS, aka Rootless mode (#56420)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/rootless-beta.md

---
layout: blog

> title: "Kubernetes v1.37: KubeletInUserNamespace (aka Rootless mode) Graduates to Beta"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes v1.37: Rootless Linux Nodes Graduates to Beta"
```
?

Author: I'd prefer to explicitly mention the feature gate to avoid confusion with UserNamespacesSupport

Reviewer: I'll explain why I / we typically don't reference feature gates in announcements: they are jargon that many readers won't recognize.

However, I'll leave this as-is.

> slug: rootless-beta

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: rootless-beta
draft: true
```

author: >
  [Akihiro Suda](https://github.com/AkihiroSuda) (NTT)
---

> Kubernetes v1.37 promotes the `KubeletInUserNamespace` feature gate to beta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes v1.37 promotes _node components in user namespaces_ to Beta.
```

Author: I'd prefer to explicitly mention the feature gate to avoid confusion with UserNamespacesSupport

> With this feature, all of the node components (kubelet, CRI and OCI runtimes,

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
With this feature enabled, all of the node components (kubelet, CRI and OCI runtimes,
```

CNI plugins, and kube-proxy) can run as a non-root user on the host, using a
[Linux user namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html).

> This technique is also known as "Rootless mode".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique is also known as _rootless mode_.
```

[seccomp](/docs/tutorials/security/seccomp/) to prevent containers from invoking
unnecessary system calls.

### Use cases

- **Production clusters**: mitigate potential container-breakout vulnerabilities.
- **Shared machines (e.g., HPC)**: users can deploy Kubernetes without asking the machine
  administrator for root privileges, and without the risk of accidentally breaking
  other users' environments.
- **Laptops**: prevent a local cluster from accidentally breaking the host system configuration,
  e.g., the host iptables rules used for VPNs.
- **AI sandbox**: a Kubernetes application developer may create a dedicated local user account for
  running an AI coding agent and a test Kubernetes cluster.
  This setup is useful for preventing the AI agent from breaking the host when it is deceived by
  malicious information on the Internet.
- **Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes**: a nested cluster can run inside a parent cluster as a user-namespaced
  pod (`hostUsers: false`), isolating workloads more strictly than Kubernetes API namespaces do.
- **Bootstrapping**: a temporary unprivileged cluster can be used to bootstrap an actual
  cluster, e.g., with Cluster API.

## How does it work?

> A user namespace maps a non-root user (e.g., UID 1000) to a "fake root" (UID 0) whose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Linux kernel _user namespace_ maps a host level non-root user (e.g., UID 1000) to a _fake root_ user inside the namespace. The UID 0
```
?

privileges are limited to the inside of the namespace.
The fake root is enough for most of the node components' tasks: mounting volumes,
creating cgroups, and configuring the network namespaces of pods.

The user namespace has to be created outside of Kubernetes.

> For example, Rootless Docker can be used to prepare the user namespace in which Kubernetes runs.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
For example, [Rootless](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/) Docker can be used to prepare the user namespace in which Kubernetes runs.
```

> The `KubeletInUserNamespace` feature gate itself is quite "boring": basically it just lets the kubelet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes implementation of this feature for the kubelet and other components is quite "boring": basically it just lets the kubelet
```

Author: Any reason to avoid mentioning feature gate?

ignore permission errors that occur when [setting some sysctl values](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.37.0-beta.0/pkg/kubelet/cm/container_manager_linux.go#L499-L517)
(e.g., `vm.overcommit_memory` and `kernel.panic`)
and when [watching kernel messages via `/dev/kmsg`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.37.0-beta.0/pkg/kubelet/kubelet.go#L586-L601).

See [Running Kubernetes Node Components as a Non-root User](/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-in-userns/)
for further information.

## What changed from Alpha to Beta?

- The `KubeletInUserNamespace` feature gate is now enabled by default.
  Enabling the gate does not put the kubelet into a user namespace automatically, so nothing
  changes for existing "rootful" clusters.
- `kubectl get nodes -o yaml` now reports whether nodes are running in a user namespace via
  the [`runningInUserNamespace`](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/api/core/v1#NodeSystemInfo) property.
  A cluster administrator can use this property to set node labels or taints, to avoid scheduling workloads
  that need real root privileges (e.g., some CNI plugin installers) onto rootless nodes.

> - The `NodeConformance` e2e tests now run on a rootless cluster in the Kubernetes CI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Kubernetes' own CI/CD testing, the node conformance end to end tests now run on a rootless cluster
```

  ([ci-kubernetes-e2e-kind-rootless](https://prow.k8s.io/job-history/gs/kubernetes-ci-logs/logs/ci-kubernetes-e2e-kind-rootless)).

Several related improvements have also happened outside the promotion of the feature gate itself:

- **Linux kernel v6.3 (2023)**: added support for [idmapped tmpfs](https://kernelnewbies.org/Linux_6.3).
- **Kubernetes v1.33 (2025)**: enabled the [`UserNamespacesSupport`](/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/) feature gate
  by default, allowing user-namespaced pods (`hostUsers: false`) to be created without extra configuration.
- **containerd v2.1 (2025)**: added support for [writable cgroups](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v2.1.0).

With these improvements, a Kubernetes cluster with `KubeletInUserNamespace` can now also be nested
inside Kubernetes pods with `hostUsers: false` (`UserNamespacesSupport`).

## How to use it

> 

Reviewer: We should list the following examples in either:
- alphabetical order
- randomized order (we trust you, but please inject actual entropy if picking this option)

Author: I sorted the list due to the dependency of the description:
- kind: the most typical way, so this has to be the first
- minikube: very similar to kind, so it has to follow kind
- Usernetes: compared to kind and minikube, so it has to follow them
- k3s: this one is very different from others, so it has to be the last

Reviewer: This is more of a problem. Can you make it clear that kind and minikube are from Kubernetes, but the other two are third party?

Reviewer: I get the point you're making, but here's why I was loth to make an exception from CNCF policy: you are the author of the tool that you're listing earlier than alphabetical order. k3s naturally sorts before Usernetes.

I can tell you some good news. CNCF policy does allow for a random choice, and I flipped a coin. This current ordering was the one that came up.

So, it's good.

### kind

The easiest way is to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) (a Kubernetes SIG Testing project)

> to run a Kubernetes cluster in Rootless Docker, Rootless Podman, or Rootless nerdctl:

Reviewer: ("important nit")
```suggestion
to run a Kubernetes cluster in rootless Docker, rootless nerdctl, or rootless Podman:
```
(alphabetical order for 3rd party products)

```bash

> dockerd-rootless-setuptool.sh install

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Example using Docker
dockerd-rootless-setuptool.sh install
```

kind create cluster
```

Depending on the host configuration, you may need additional configuration for
systemd, kernel modules, sysctl, etc.

See the [Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/) and
the [kind documentation](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/) for further information.

### minikube

[minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/) (a Kubernetes SIG Cluster Lifecycle project)

> also supports running a Kubernetes cluster in Rootless Docker and Rootless Podman:

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
also supports running a Kubernetes cluster in rootless Docker or rootless Podman:
```

```bash
dockerd-rootless-setuptool.sh install
minikube start --driver=docker
```

See the [minikube documentation](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/drivers/docker/)
for further information.

### Usernetes

[Usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes) (a third-party project)

> is a distribution of Rootless Kubernetes maintained by the author of this article.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
is a distribution of rootless Kubernetes, maintained by the author of this article.
```

The project began in 2018, and it is where the `KubeletInUserNamespace` feature gate
originally came from.

Unlike kind and minikube, Usernetes supports creating a cluster with multiple Rootless

> Docker/Podman/nerdctl nodes, connected using VXLAN via the Flannel CNI plugin.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
Unlike kind and minikube, Usernetes supports creating a cluster with multiple rootless
Docker / Podman / nerdctl nodes, connected using VXLAN via the Flannel CNI plugin.
```

Usernetes also experimentally supports a [Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/tree/master/kubernetes) mode.

### k3s

[k3s](https://k3s.io) (a CNCF Sandbox project) also supports [rootless mode](https://docs.k3s.io/advanced#running-rootless-servers-experimental).

> Unlike kind, minikube, and the current generation of Usernetes, Rootless k3s does not rely on an external runtime such as Rootless Docker.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
Unlike kind, minikube, and the current generation of Usernetes, rootless k3s does not rely on an external runtime such as rootless Docker.
```

## What's next?

Depending on feedback and adoption, the Kubernetes project plans to graduate this feature to
General Availability (GA) in a future release. If you have feedback on this feature, please
open an issue in the [kubernetes/kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes) repository.

The project is also discussing several Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals that may contribute to
simplifying Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes with this feature:
- [KEP-5474: Enable Writable cgroups for unprivileged containers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5474)
- [KEP-5714: Allow specifying whether to unshare cgroup namespaces](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5714)

## Getting involved

We always welcome new contributors. If you would like to get involved, you can join the

> [Kubernetes Node Special Interest Group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-node)

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
[Node Special Interest Group](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/node/)
```

The project is also discussing several Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals that may contribute to
simplifying Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes with this feature:
- [KEP-5474: Enable Writable cgroups for unprivileged containers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5474)
- [KEP-5714: Allow specifying whether to unshare cgroup namespaces](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5714)

## Getting involved

We always welcome new contributors. If you would like to get involved, you can join the
[Node Special Interest Group](https://www.kubernetes.dev/community/community-groups/sigs/node/)
(SIG Node).

If you would like to share feedback, you can do so on our
[public Slack channel](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/sig-node)
(visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation if you need one).

Special thanks to everyone who helped design and implement this feature,
including but not limited to (in alphabetical order):
- Bing Hongtao ([HirazawaUi](https://github.com/HirazawaUi))
- Jordan Liggitt ([liggitt](https://github.com/liggitt))
- Sergey Kanzhelev ([SergeyKanzhelev](https://github.com/SergeyKanzhelev))

> - Tim Hockin ([thockin](https://github.com/thockin))

Author: cc @HirazawaUi @liggitt @SergeyKanzhelev @thockin 
 
May I ask you to review this ? Thanks again

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.37: KubeletInUserNamespace (aka Rootless mode) Graduates to Beta"

> slug: rootless-beta

Reviewer: We'll want to fix this before publication (Release Comms will do that)

  other users' environments.
- **Laptops**: prevent a local cluster from accidentally breaking the host system configuration,
  e.g., the host iptables rules used for VPNs.
- **AI sandbox**: a Kubernetes application developer may create a dedicated local user account for
  running an AI coding agent and a test Kubernetes cluster.
  This setup is useful for preventing the AI agent from breaking the host when it is deceived by
  malicious information on the Internet.
- **Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes**: a nested cluster can run inside a parent cluster as a user-namespaced
  pod (`hostUsers: false`), isolating workloads more strictly than Kubernetes API namespaces do.
- **Bootstrapping**: a temporary unprivileged cluster can be used to bootstrap an actual
  cluster, e.g., with Cluster API.

## How does it work?

A Linux kernel _user namespace_ maps a host level non-root user (e.g., UID 1000) to a _fake root_ user inside the namespace. The UID 0
privileges are limited to the inside of the namespace.
The fake root is enough for most of the node components' tasks: mounting volumes,
creating cgroups, and configuring the network namespaces of pods.

> It still comes with some [caveats](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-node/2033-kubelet-in-userns-aka-rootless/README.md#notesconstraintscaveats-optional) that may break compatibility with specific CNI and CSI drivers, though.

Reviewer: Ideally, hyperlink to caveats in the **documentation**. If there's no documentation mentioning the caveat, we should try to fix that.

A better hyperlink is to https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/2033/#notesconstraintscaveats-optional (renders more nicely).

The user namespace has to be created outside of Kubernetes.
For example, [Rootless](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/) Docker can be used to prepare the user namespace in which Kubernetes runs.

The `KubeletInUserNamespace` feature gate itself is quite "boring": basically it just lets the kubelet
ignore permission errors that occur when [setting some sysctl values](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.37.0-beta.0/pkg/kubelet/cm/container_manager_linux.go#L499-L517)
(e.g., `vm.overcommit_memory` and `kernel.panic`)

> and when [watching kernel messages via `/dev/kmsg`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.37.0-beta.0/pkg/kubelet/kubelet.go#L586-L601).

Reviewer: If we can update this to link to the v1.37.0 tag, perhaps post release - even better.

- **containerd v2.1 (2025)**: added support for [writable cgroups](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/releases/tag/v2.1.0).

With these improvements, a Kubernetes cluster with `KubeletInUserNamespace` can now also be nested
inside Kubernetes pods with `hostUsers: false` (`UserNamespacesSupport`).

## How to use it

### kind

The easiest way is to use [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) (a Kubernetes SIG Testing project)
to run a Kubernetes cluster in rootless Docker, rootless nerdctl, or rootless Podman:

```bash
# Example using Docker
dockerd-rootless-setuptool.sh install
kind create cluster
```

Depending on the host configuration, you may need additional configuration for
systemd, kernel modules, sysctl, etc.

See the [Docker documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/rootless/) and
the [kind documentation](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/rootless/) for further information.

### minikube

[minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/) (a Kubernetes SIG Cluster Lifecycle project)
also supports running a Kubernetes cluster in rootless Docker or rootless Podman:

```bash

> dockerd-rootless-setuptool.sh install
> minikube start --driver=docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Example using Docker
dockerd-rootless-setuptool.sh install
minikube start --driver=docker
```

The project began in 2018, and it is where the `KubeletInUserNamespace` feature gate
originally came from.

Unlike kind and minikube, Usernetes supports creating a cluster with multiple rootless
Docker / Podman / nerdctl nodes, connected using VXLAN via the Flannel CNI plugin.

Usernetes also experimentally supports a [Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes/tree/master/kubernetes) mode.

### k3s

[k3s](https://k3s.io) (a CNCF Sandbox project) also supports [rootless mode](https://docs.k3s.io/advanced#running-rootless-servers-experimental).
Unlike kind, minikube, and the current generation of Usernetes, rootless k3s does not rely on an external runtime such as rootless Docker.

## What's next?

Depending on feedback and adoption, the Kubernetes project plans to graduate this feature to
General Availability (GA) in a future release. If you have feedback on this feature, please
open an issue in the [kubernetes/kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes) repository.

The project is also discussing several Kubernetes Enhancement Proposals that may contribute to
simplifying Kubernetes-in-Kubernetes with this feature:

> - [KEP-5474: Enable Writable cgroups for unprivileged containers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5474)
> - [KEP-5714: Allow specifying whether to unshare cgroup namespaces](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5714)

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
- [KEP-5474: Enable Writable cgroups for unprivileged containers](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5474/)
- [KEP-5714: Allow specifying whether to unshare cgroup namespaces](https://www.kubernetes.dev/resources/keps/5714)
```

The blog team can fix this **after** a merge.
